---
layout: post
title:  "Review - Skyroads (MS-DOS)"
date:   2020-11-20 22:00:00 -0500
categories: general
---
Originally Written: **Early 2017**

There were few good alternatives to the adventure games, role-playing games, and strategy games that helped define PC gaming before Doom. Sure, there were some first-person shooters like *Wolfenstein 3D*, and there were some platformers like *Commander Keen* and *Jill of the Jungle*, but relative to games like *Civilization* and *The Secret of Monkey Island*, high-quality action and arcade games were few and far between.

*Skyroads* helped satiate that desire.

The main focus of *Skyroads* is simple. You pilot a small spacecraft through polygonal tracks, zipping through and jumping over obstacles at high speeds. It is a very simple concept, and for a platform starved of arcade-style games, Blue Moon Interactive’s offering filled the niche quite nicely. There are thirty levels within ten themed areas, each taking between thirty and ninety seconds to complete. The only objective is to reach the half-pipes that end the level. 

It is all rather simple, and that translates nicely to the controls and heads-up display. Speed and control is controlled via the arrow keys, and jumping is done via the space key. As for the heads-up display, there are only a few elements. On the far left is the progress bar. The large circle in the middle represents the speed. The two small arcs in the middle represent the oxygen and fuel. Fuel is based on distance; oxygen is based on time. If either run out, either there is a refuel station somewhere in the level, or you are not going fast enough. There is a gravity meter determining how high you can jump. Then there is an indicator representing when the Jump-O-Master is being used.

To be frank, I cannot figure out how to invoke the Jump-O-Master. However, I am sure it is connected to the craft’s ability to bounce. After jumping, your ship bounces a little bit. During that bounce, as long as the craft is over solid ground, you can jump, allowing for a bump in height. Sometimes the Jump-O-Master turns on when this happens, so I am assuming that these two are connected. However, Blue Moon did a poor job telegraphing that.

To be fair, it would be somewhat misleading to just call it an action game. The game is predicate on precision platforming. In the introductory levels, the platforming is rather forgiving, with many of the levels being able to be completed in just one try. However, the latter half of the game is another story. The platforming in the latter parts of the game requires exact jumping at the exact time, at the exact speed, and at the exact pixel. You are not going to be able to just complete these levels in one go. Then there are the half-pipes. Some levels require you to move on top of them. Of course, you can never balance yourself on those things, so traversing on them is always a precarious mess. Adding to the mess is the need to use the Jump-O-Master, since some clearances need that extra height. These levels will take a good while to complete. There is a silver lining though to the intense difficulty: the levels are extremely short.

Another much more problematic aspect to the difficulty is *Skyroads*’ reliance on memorization. The levels are filled with dead ends and traps. Death is inevitable. So, you'll be playing these levels frequently. Again, the brevity of these levels is a saving grace, but the fact that Blue Moon decided to lean on memorization so much is annoying. In conjunction with the precision platforming, many of the levels are simply inaccessible to the average player. Still, the brevity of the levels are the level design’s saving grace; if the levels were any longer than ninety seconds, the game’s ability to be both difficult and enjoyable would fall apart quickly.

Speaking of level design, there are a couple pleasant trends to watch out for. Most impressive is the fact that some of the areas’ levels follow an expected theme. For instance, Misty is rather calming and sparse, as showcased by its conservative placement of platforms and cool color scheme. On the other hand, there is the Asteroid belt, which has an earthier color scheme and liberal usage of platforms. It is a nice touch, and it is always nice to see it in games.

Throughout the levels, there are a series of brightly colored tiles littered throughout the level. For instance, bright blue tiles refuel, bright green tiles slow down, bright lime green tiles speed up, and bright red tiles destroy your ship. There is also a grey tile, which inhibits movement. Blue Moon did a pretty good job in integrating these special tiles into the levels, and it forces players to be more aware of their surroundings.

From an audiovisual perspective, *Skyroads* is pretty good. The VGA graphics are as expected, with somewhat pretty background graphics, and very simple polygons for the tracks (forgivable, since VGA could not do polygons well, and I am sure that textures were not possible). Outside of that, there is not much to say about the graphics.

The same could be said about the music. In fact, the story behind its composition is much more interesting than the music itself. The music was originally done on an Amiga using tracking software. The result is that there are major differences between what the music should have sounded like on the Amiga, and the end result on the PC, which utilized FM sound synthesis. Both are really good, and bring something new to the table.

That last statement pretty much encapsulates my view on *Skyroads* as a whole: it is pretty good, and it brought something new to DOS. Sure, the reliance on memorization and the sometimes sadistic difficulty get in the way of enjoying the game, but from the level design to the arcade-style simplicity to the audiovisual aspect, there is more to like about this game than dislike.

Also, it has been freeware since the turn of the century. If you can download a couple of files and install DOSBox, you have no excuse to not play *Skyroads* at least once.