---
layout: post
title:  "Review - Sonic The Hedgehog (Sega Game Gear)"
date:   2020-11-20 22:00:00 -0500
categories: general
---

Originally Written: **March 2016**

It is 1991. *Sonic The Hedgehog* had proven itself to be a smash hit on the Mega Drive. In that same year, Sega came out with the Game Gear. The portable energy glutton boasted graphical and sound capabilities close to the Sega Master System, and was trying to compete with the Nintendo Game Boy. Since *Sonic The Hedgehog* helped sell millions of Mega Drives, it was clear to Sega that a port of the blue hedgehog’s first outing would help sell Game Gears.

It was successful.

For the most part.

Although a port of the Mega Drive original, the Game Gear version of *Sonic The Hedgehog* is not a one-to-one mapping of the original. Although the storyline and characters are the same, the levels, level design, and gameplay styles differ greatly.

First, let us look at what is the same. Dr. Robotnik is still using animals to power his robots in order to take over the world. It is up to Sonic, with the help of the Chaos Emeralds, to stop the fat man. The aesthetic design, which is good for an early Game Gear game, is similar to the Mega Drive original, and has a nice Sonic-esque feel to things. The same goes to the music, which is well made.

The rest is different from the Mega Drive original. The most glaring difference: the pacing of the game. This is not surprising, given that the hardware just would not be able to handle the speed and physics of the Mega Drive version. So, the platforming is a lot more like *Super Mario Brothers*, and emphasis is placed more on slower-paced precision platforming.

The game’s differences stem from that. To start off, Sonic goes much slower. There are very few instances where Sonic can go extremely fast. When that happens, not even the camera can keep up. In fact, the only instance of extreme speed that the average player will encounter is in the first act of Green Hill Zone. Aside from that, Sonic can only really go at a moderate pace.

This is where the level design comes in. Unlike the levels in the Mega Drive original (barring the archaic and out-of-place Marble and Labyrinth zones), the levels in the Game Gear version force Sonic to slow down and be more precise in his movements. Platforms are smaller, levels are designed to force a lot of jumping, and there are plenty of bottomless pits. In contrast, the Mega Drive version of *Sonic The Hedgehog* has relatively few bottomless pits, and platforms are wide. On top of that, levels are more likely to be designed to coax Sonic into moving quickly along the x-axis. If that was not enough, some of the levels force Sonic to move at a fixed pace (for instance, the second act of Bridge Zone).

This has its own implications. Due to the slower pace, and given the level of exploration Sonic can do in his first outing on the Mega Drive, one could expect more exploration to compensate for lost speed. However, the level design is very linear. At best, there might be some deviation to a single path. In the end, the levels only have one path. Honestly, it is not much of a problem, especially given how early the game came out in the Game Gear’s life cycle.

At the same time, since the Game Gear version of *Sonic The Hedgehog* emphasizes precision platforming, the controls are expected to be precise. They are, but only most of the time. The controls in this version of *Sonic The Hedgehog* do not seem as precise as they should be, making some levels a mess.

One example is the entirety of Labyrinth Zone, and it represents another problem within the level design. Some of these levels are too slow; in other words, the combination of slower paced platforming and environmental effects in the level makes certain levels a dreadfully slow mess. In the case of Labyrinth Zone, the fact that you are under water for much of the level, along with the fact that Sonic goes much slower and Sonic does not control as well as he should, leads to the entirety of that zone being a complete and utter mess.

However, many of the levels are designed very well. For instance, the first acts of Green Hill, Bridge, and Scrap Brain Zone are enjoyable platforming experiences. Each level allows for a nice degree of precision based platforming, as well as attempts in speed-based platforming. Furthermore, Jungle Zone did a very good job in its design, and made for a fun experience.

The game is extremely short. An experienced player could easily beat the game in under an hour. Sega might have tried to lengthen the game in some ways. First, instead of tying the Chaos Emeralds to special stages, they are now in various parts of certain levels, requiring some exploration or added skill to get them (kind of like the green stars in *Super Mario 3D Land* and *Super Mario 3D World*). Of course, it is likely that this was done due to the limitations of developing an early Game Gear game. Another way to increase the gameplay time: increase the difficulty by forcing players to fight the bosses.

Obviously, the Game Gear version of *Sonic The Hedgehog* is not perfect. The change in gameplay introduces issues that Sega did not completely fix, leading to some hiccups in the control and level design. However, in the end, it is a very enjoyable, albeit short, platforming experience. For the most part, this version of *Sonic The Hedgehog* is well worth your time.

Obviously, it would be better to just get the Mega Drive original.
